---
layout: post
title: Transfer Admission Guide
---

An Exhaustive Guide for Transfer Admission (IIT Bombay)

Preface

This guide is not meant to be read in a single sitting.

I have divided it into multiple modules. Read the ones you require, given your interest.

Part 1: The Cost of Transfer

Part 2: What's the Transfer Application

Part 3: What does it take to Transfer

Part 4: Transfer Application Timeline

Part 5: My Experience with Transfer Application (includes Why Transfer)

Note : If you are not interested in transfer, you can skip Part 1-4.

---

The Cost of Transfer

Now before I enter the technicalities of transfer admission, first thing I need to clear is that you have to have an extremely strong reason for transfer. The three main reasons are:

1. Transfer is mentally and emotionally taxing. 
   IIT Bombay has enough opportunities that you can leverage for growth in multiple spheres. Only after you firmly believe that your growth in a certain direction is being limited by the college, would I recommend that you even start thinking about transfer.
   Thinking about transfer admission is a heavy load on the mind and heart. It will push you to recognize what you actually value about the institute. Then, it will push you to actively reject the lovable nature of IIT. There is the additional cost of leaving your friends.
   Transfer is also ultimately highly improbable.
   Know what you are losing so that you can appreciate what you are working for.
2. Transfer is extra tough for students who need financial aid.
   Other than Harvard, Yale and MIT, every other college considers transfer students need for financial aid (also known as "scholarship"; a misnomer). It will cost you a hefty 1 - 1.5 crore for 3 years if you go to any other college. Considering the chances of getting into those 3 colleges, it is safe to assume that transfer is an extremely costly affair.
   Important Note: If finances is the only thing stopping you, only apply to Harvard, Yale and MIT. Many AIR 1 and AIR 2 students have transferred to MIT in the past because they loved physics and needed to save on finances.
3. Transfer application takes time, and pushes on academics.
   During the month of February, all I did was go to classes and work on my application. It was stressful to manage midsems alongside the applications. I managed to perform well in my midsems because I paid extra attention in lectures to make up for lost mugging time. Otherwise, it is a risky affair academically.

Even after reading all the above 3 reasons, if you still think that you want to leave IIT Bombay, read ahead. This guide is for those of you. 

---

The Transfer Application

Transfer application can be broken down into

- Essays
  The most important part of your application.
  The heart and soul of your application.
  In the essays, you get to convey your reasons for transfer. You get to communicate what you best love about a particular college.
  Essay writing for applications is a niche skill. You have to be authentic in your writing. It will take you multiple tries before you think you have anything which might be worth reading. The main advice I can give is: show, don't tell and keep it honest.
- CPI
  If you are anywhere above 8.5 CPI or 9, you should be fine. Anything below and your chances might nearly be nil.
- Transcripts
  College and High School transcripts must be delivered by post from your respective schools and IIT. High school marks don't matter that much, so don't worry if you haven't done well in your boards.
- Recommendations
  Second most important part of your application after essays.
  Recommendations offer a third person point of view on the applicant. The admission committee gets to see how you are perceived by others. They want to measure your dedication, your involvement in class and any signs of excellence they are seeking. Most colleges have a personality, and they seek students which fit into that personality. Recommendations offer a genuine view for them to check.
- College Report
  A minor form that needs to be filled by your department HoD, and posted by them. ( Can also be sent by scan )
- Extracurriculars
  Almost as important as your CPI.
  This is your way of showing what you are going to do once you get to their college. Extracurriculars are irrelevant if you have not demonstrated through competitions or portfolios, that you have some level of excellence in that activity which can be grown.
- ACT with Writing / SAT
  Many people think this is a big deal, but it is probably the most useless part of your application.
  It is a tokenistic necessity for some colleges.

---

What It Takes to Transfer

Transfer applicants are college students.

The first year showcases, in a more concrete way, what a particular student has to offer.

For the application committee, the three questions that are clear are:

1. Can you perform well academically?
2. What do you do outside class and how well?

The third instrumental question: Why transfer?

For Q1 and Q2, they see your CPI, extracurricular achievements or extracurriculars in general.

For Q3, if they see that you have a strong reason to transfer to that college in particular, then you are most probably in.

Adcoms want to have students who know what they want to do, to come to their college and use their resources to the fullest extent.

You can only realize the gaps of your original college if you have a goal/strategy.

I had a very clear plan for college. Debate at an international level, pursue research, and interact with a fuller spectrum of majors. 



For Q1, keep your GPA up top.

For Q2, spend your first semester rigorously exploring. Go to competitions, events, get good. (I danced, debated, acted, rapped, went to MHacks, wrote, a lot of stuff.)

For Q3, spend your first year fiercely figuring out what you want to get good at, and why.

---

Transfer Application Timeline

Conditions: Reason for transferring is solid; Sufficient family support acquired; College list is decided; 

Timeline

First Semester

- Set up the application
- ACT with Writing / SAT
- Contact for Recommendations and interact with professors/TAs
- Writing Essays - Start towards the last month when you think you have some image of IITB in mind

Winter

- Writing Essays
- Send school transcripts
- ( Get family support )

Second Semester till February

- Send Transcripts ( first week )
- Send College Report ( first week )
- Collect Recommendations ( by Feb 1 )
- Writing Essays 

Substeps

Setting up the Application

1. Make an account on the Common App (https://apply.commonapp.org/login)
   - If you are applying to MIT, go to https://mittransfer.slideroom.com
   - If you are applying to the UCs (for sophies), go to https://admissions.universityofcalifornia.edu/applicant/login.htm
2. Go to College Search tab, and add all the colleges on your list.
3. Go to the My Colleges tab, and fill in the details for each college.
4. Go to the Common App tab, and fill in the necessary details. Leave Writing section for now.
5. Make note of all essay prompts for your colleges, and the Common App essay.

ACT with Writing / SAT

1. Buy the ACT official workbook and finish the book.
2. Solve as many papers as you can till you feel confident.
3. Register early.

Collecting Recommendations

1. Considering how rare it is for freshman to know their professors, ask 3 TAs if they are OK with writing / sending your recommendations.
2. Give them a template from http://blog.prepscholar.com/a-great-college-recommendation-letter-template ( ask them to ignore the fancy language, not a necessity )
3. Ask them to write a recommendation which evaluates you academically and personality-wise

Sending Transcripts

1. At the start of second semester, go there and fill the form for posting of transcripts to every college you are applying to.
2. Contact your old school to send your transcripts by post.
3. Don't delay this. Academic Office can throw fits. My transcripts arrived a month after the deadline.

College Report

1. Download and print the College Report from the FERPA section on the Common App.
2. Go to your Faculty Advisor. Get it filled. Get his signature.
3. Go to the Head of Department. Get his signature.
4. Send it by post / fax to every college.

Writing Essays

1. Start with your Common App essay. Google "How to write the common app transfer essay" and any of the top links work.
2. Remember essays take time. I went through 7-8 drafts before finalizing. 
3. Next for each college specific essay, I'd recommend you follow:
   - https://www.albert.io/blog/why-upenn-college-essay-example-1-penn-supplement/
   - Essay Hell
   - General Googling around also works
4. Dig deep into each college. Learn about the main academic opportunities at hand, the student life. Know the college site in and out. Details are everything. ( My essays are available at demand for reference. )
5. You will need a lot of feedback on essays to improve. I hired a counselor, but it was too expensive so I don't recommend. Go for online help from sites like https://www.reddit.com/r/ApplyingToCollege, College Confidential, and so on.

---

My Experience with Transfer Application





Why did I apply transfer?

The question I am asked frequently.

To be honest, it was always a gut feeling. However, a gut feeling is not an answer people will accept

---

Your reason to transfer is going to test you time and again. Be ready.

---

Ideas

- Add section for Professors / TAs
  
