---
layout: post
title: Things Happen
---

The most inescapable reality that college students neglect often is that:

Things happen.

It is so easy to sit in your room and read a book, hang out with friends, have those tasteless conversations, give tests, chill after tests.

It is fun.

Repetitive and fun.

What makes things weird, and causes those moments when people freeze up are ones where: things happen.

Your friend transfers out of college. Another friend gets into a fight with your community and leaves. You confess something to someone.

Things happen.

Then they stick.

They stick in the background of your mind. You might think that they were one-off events which you can drown out in your endless fun of living, but they aren't.

I think the main things I grasped during my freshman year are that things happen and it is only up to us how we react to it.

Small things happen.

Big things happen.

You don't speak at a table with a group of 5 for about 10-15 times. It happened. Small things built up. Then finally you decide you are going to speak. A measured reaction.

Toughest things I have done in college:
- Recognize that things happen
- React

Negligence is real. It is common. I think every college student is guilty of this at some point regarding something.

Many people in IIT Bombay refrained from making small starting off decisions.

"Should I sit down now?" | "Who is going to knock on the door?" | "Should I ask the question?" | "So who is going to talk first?"

Lead people in the moment of their indecision.

People start thinking for themselves only after someone else prompts them to start.

College pushes for improvement quite a bit in that aspect.

That is, only if you recognize it.