---
layout: post
title: Thinking about life
---

Life excites me. Just existence by itself forms an object of satisfaction for me. A friend of mine recently pointed out that I smile nearly all the time (albeit creepily). For a while I thought, maybe I am actually crazy. That was until I met another person who was a stronger embodiment of this characteristic of mine: Sumit Chaturvedi. After analyzing his nature and having deeper discussions with him, I came upon a realization which has clarified to a large extent "what it all means."

Sumit made me realize:
- I enjoy everything.

I enjoy the happiness. I enjoy the sadness I feel. I enjoy meeting new people. I enjoy the hate and anger a rare few incite from me. I enjoy fear. Now, maybe I have started to enjoy failure. I enjoy the journey.

Reaching the second last step - enjoying failure - has put life under a different lens. When there is no fear of failure and no strong desire for success, your mind becomes focused on enjoying the journey. This stage has become my mental liberation. My Nirvana.

Last week, after going through gruelling group dance practice sessions which I thoroughly enjoyed, my Nirvana materialized the day I heard a senior give a review of our rehearsal.

>Guys, in life I have only one main belief. Success and failure don't matter if you have enjoyed the journey. Right now I can see the strong bond between you guys and your mentor. You are enlivened by the enjoyment of each step. You have already won.
This was my Eureka moment. The cards fell in place. The pent up frustration regarding the complication of life and hopeless pursuit of happiness were released in this moment.

This might sound stupid to some goal-oriented people but I firmly believe that if I have completely enjoyed the journey then failure is acceptable. Maybe I won't branch change. Maybe I won't change my university. That's fine, because right now I am enjoying my academics.

I watch my friends tear their hair apart over minute disparity in marks with others. It seems so comical now. Deriving your happiness from your relative performance is a recipe for disaster. When I saw the places I lost my marks in - which were only silly ones - I felt largely unperturbed because I knew that I had grasped the essence of the concept that was being tested.
However, I had promised my father that I would change my branch whatever may come. Am I sure that by solely enjoying my academics I will reach the level required for a branch change? No, I am not. But my gut tells me not to worry. As long as I enjoy the process, whatever the end result be I will have won.

This might seem like a loser's mindset. Trust me I thought the same. At the same time, my gut told me that this mindset might be the one that actually mattered. This is the growth mindset.

At the end of one year of The Omnipotent Journal, I have attained the growth mindset both in mind and spirit.

My post "Ambition" is nothing but a list of ideas/projects that excite my mind and pull it out of its dormance. I am proud to say that I have been making constant progress on my Quantum Mechanics. The key to this was so simple: I chose to do something I enjoy. I enjoy flipping through pages of dense material that takes hours to wrap my head around. That feeling of confusion lingering at the end of every passage is the best. This might sound counterintuitive, but the best lecture is one at the end of which you are more confused than initially. The lecture pushed the foundations of your mind. The crux of a confusion is a misunderstood concept. Changing those faulty concepts is learning!

Heh, this wouldn't be a journal post without some digression and rambling, would it?

The dancing experience re-taught me another essential truth: True happiness from creating happiness for others.
Throughout the dance practice sessions our mentors were always happy with our work. They were constantly astounded by our "impeccable" performance. There was real care in their words and actions. Watching them smile and gladly grin every time we danced made an eternal form of happiness to flow in me. At the end of our performance at the competition, something unscripted unexpected happened. Our mentors ran in crazed happiness towards us on the stage. Their happiness was so evident it made me glee with joy. The mentors and all the dancers got into a huge group hug. We jumped together in happiness shouting at the top of our voices. This type of happiness sprouting from the sense of community. This happiness emerging from making the ones who care about us happy is the purest.

Creating happiness for yourself by helping others attain it is one of the inexplicable joys of living. I love existence. For the past few months whenever I asked the question, "What do you ultimately want from life," I got an unique answer from the students whom I found fascinating at IIT Bombay. The answer was: "A smile on my parent's face."
My parents are the ones who care the most about me. My family truly speaking. I frankly fell in out of touch with this truth because of how badly I caught up in myself. This truth still needs to be further assimilated, but major progress has been made.
At the end of my first year with The Omnipotent Journal, I have found my focus shifted completely from the artificial to the genuine.

My arrogance and condescencion are subsiding. They were based on misconceptions I have about myself. As time passes, my character will morph into what I want it to be. Applying to colleges abroad might not have gotten me any "real" results but it instilled in me a perspective which has allowed me to pull maximum insight from my time here at IIT Bombay. Beyond my view of the world immediately around me, applying abroad has prompted me to ponder about the world outside my area of existence.
Ultimately, however, I need to leave IIT Bombay.

This college is great for sure. It has excellent professors and researchers. The celebrative spirit of the students is remarkable. However, there is no real culture of "Work Hard, Play Hard." Meeting fascinating individuals in terms of expertise is nearly impossible. The perspectives of a myriad of personalities have undoubtedly given me a gift that I cannot repay. That is, just, the end of the line. I need a place where they appreciate learning for the act of it. Somewhere everyone is always on the brink of insanity.

This post has no real point. This post symbolizes my life and journey alongside my old blog. All over the place but a complete metamorphosis.

Funny part is all I am doing is returning to the mindset of the simpleton. The mindset I once avoided like the plague is the one I now desire the most. Life is ironic in its own way.